---
title: "Affine Varieties"
category: "Pure Mathematics"
level: "Medium"
tags:
summary: "6 weeks!?"
author: "Dilemma Lucis"
date: "2026-04-02"
favorite: false
---
"Hey, I just realized that we need to decide on a final project. Since we only have six weeks, probably we can't do something *too ambitious*, you know. I have a couple of options in mind, let me know what you think  
**.**  
**.**  
**.**  
So the first option is **studying (classical) algebraic varieties and schemes, and how schemes is a generalization of varieties.**  
**.**  
**.**  
**.**  
I think we can go through around **a chapter's worth of content**"  

Not too ambitious my ass, Myeonhu. Anyway,
***
The following is mainly from the man, the myth, the legend himself, Hartshorne's Algebraic Geometry:

Let $k$ be an algebraically closed field. We define the *affine $n$-space* over k, denoted $\mathbb{A}_k^n$ or simply $\mathbb{A}^n$, to be the set of $n$-tuples of elements of $k$. An element $P = (a_1, a_2, ..., a_n) \in \mathbb{A}^k$ is called a point, and $a_i$ is the $i$-th coordinate of $P$.

Let $A = k[x_1, x_2, ..., x_n]$, be the polynomial ring over $n$ variables over $k$. Elements $f$ of $A$ can be thought of as functions from $\mathbb{A}^n$ to $k$, and thus we can talk about the set of its *zeros*, $Z(f) = \{ P \in A^n \vert f(P) = 0 \}$. More generally, for any subset $T \subset A$, we can talk about the common zeros of every element in $T$, called the *zero set* of $T$
$$
Z(T) = \{\, P \in A^n \mid f(P) = 0 \text{ for all } f \in T \,\}
$$
Clearly (not really), if $\mathfrak{a}$ is the ideal of $A$ generated by $T$, then $Z(T) = Z(\mathfrak{a})$; informally speaking, if $P$ is the root of every polynomial in $T$, then it will be the root of every "linear combination" of every polynomial in $T$, and hence the root of every element in the ideal generated by $T$. Furthermore, since $A$ is a Noetherian ring (every chain of ideals has a largest element), any ideal $\mathfrak{a}$ has a finite set of generators $f_1, ..., f_r$. Thus, $Z(T)$ can be expressed as the common zeros of the finite set of polynomials $f_1, ..., f_r$.

**Definition.**
A subset $Y$ of $\mathbb{A}^n$ is an *algebraic set* if there exists a subset $T \subseteq A$ such that $Y = Z(T)$.

**Proposition 1.1.**
The union of two algebraic sets is an algebraic set. The intersection of any family of algebraic sets is an algebraic set. The empty set and the whole space are algebraic sets.

*Proof.* If $Y_1 = Z(T_1)$ and $Y_2 = Z(T_2)$, then
$$
Y_1 \cup Y_2 = Z(T_1 T_2),
$$
where $T_1 T_2$ denotes the set of all products of an element of $T_1$ by an element of $T_2$.  

Indeed, if $P \in Y_1 \cup Y_2$, then either $P \in Y_1$ or $P \in Y_2$, so $P$ is a zero of every polynomial in $T_1 T_2$. Conversely, if $P \in Z(T_1 T_2)$ and $P \notin Y_1$, say, then there is an $f \in T_1$ such that $f(P) \ne 0$. Now for any $g \in T_2$, $(fg)(P) = 0$ implies that $g(P) = 0$, so that $P \in Y_2$.

If $Y_\alpha = Z(T_\alpha)$ is any family of algebraic sets, then
$$
\bigcap_\alpha Y_\alpha = Z\!\left(\bigcup_\alpha T_\alpha\right),
$$
so $\bigcap_\alpha Y_\alpha$ is also an algebraic set. Finally, the empty set $\varnothing = Z(1)$, and the whole space $\mathbb{A}^n = Z(0)$.

**Definition.** We define the Zariski topology on $\mathbb{A}^n$ by taking the open subsets to be the complements of the algebraic sets. This is a topology by **Proposition 1.1**

**Example 1.1.1.** Consider the Zariski topology on $\mathbb{A}^1$. Every ideal in $A = k[x]$ is principal, so every algebraic set is the set of zeros ($k$ is a field $\rightarrow$ $k[x]$ is an Euclidean domain and then something something and so you can divide polynomials and get that one polynomial with the smallest degree that divides every other polynomial and generates the ideal. I will ignore this for now). Since $k$ is algebraically closed, every non-zero polynomial $f(x)$ can be written as $f(x) = c(x - a_1)(x - a_2)...(x - a_n)$ $(c, a_i \in k)$. Then 
$$
Z_f = \{a_1, ..., a_n\}
$$
, and the algebraic sets are just finite subsets, and the Zariski topology is the finite complement topology.

**Definition.** A nonempty subset $Y$ of a topological space $X$ is *irreducible* if it cannot be expressed as the union
$$
Y = Y_1 \cup Y_2
$$
of two proper subsets, each one of which is closed in $Y$. The empty set is not considered to be irreducible.

**Example 1.1.2.** $\mathbb{A}^1$ is irreducible, since it is infinite yet it's only closed proper subsets are finite.

**Example 1.1.3.** Any nonempty open subset of an irreducible space is irreducible and dense.

*Proof.* Let $X$ be irreducible and $U \in X$ a nonempty open subset. If $U$ weren't dense in $X$, then we can write X as $(X - \overline{U}) \cup \overline{U}$ - both of which are nonempty and closed, and hence $X$ is not irreducible, contradiction.

Now we show that $U$ is irreducible. Assume we can rewrite it as $U = V_1 \cup V_2 = (F_1 \cap U) \cup (F_2 \cap U)$ (where $V_1, V_2, F_1, F_2$ closed, and by subspace topology) $= (F_1 \cup F_2) \cap U$. Therefore $U \in F_1 \cup F_2$, and $X = \overline{U} \in F_1 \cup F_2$. Since $X$ is irreducible, $X = F_1$ or $X = F_2$, and hence $U = V_1$ or $U = V_2$. Therefore $U$ is irreducible.

**Example 1.1.4.** If $Y$ is an irreducible subset of $X$, then its closure $\overline{Y}$ is also irreducible.

I'm not proving stuff anymore or else I won't make it on god

**Definition.** An *affine algebraic variety* (or simply affine variety) is an irreducible closed subset of $\mathbb{A}^n$ (with the induced topology). An open subset of an affine variety is a *quasi-affine variety*.

In other words, an affine algebraic variety is a set of common zeros of polynomial equations such that it is irreducible under the Zariski topology. These affine and quasi-affine varieties are our first objects of study. Before we can go further and do intersting stuff, we need to explore the relationship between subsets of $\mathbb{A}^n$ and ideals in $A$ more deeply. 

For any subset $Y \subseteq \mathbb{A}^n$, let us define the *ideal* of $Y$ in $A$ by 
$$
I(Y) = \{f \in A \mid f(P) = 0 \text{ for all } P \in Y \}
$$
(Set of functions whose zero set contains $Y$)

Now we have a function $Z$ which maps subsets of A to algebraic sets, and a function $I$, which maps subsets of $\mathbb{A}^n$ to ideals. Their properties are as follows:

**Proposition 1.2.**

(1) If $T_1 \subseteq T_2$ are subsets of $A$, then $Z(T_1) \supseteq Z(T_2)$.

(2) If $Y_1 \subseteq Y_2$ are subsets of $\mathbb{A}^n$, then $I(Y_1) \supseteq I(Y_2)$.

(3) For any two subsets $Y_1, Y_2 \subseteq \mathbb{A}^n$, we have
$$
I(Y_1 \cup Y_2) = I(Y_1) \cap I(Y_2).
$$

(4) For any ideal $\mathfrak{a} \subseteq A$,
$$
I(Z(\mathfrak{a})) = \sqrt{\mathfrak{a}},
$$
the radical of $\mathfrak{a}$.

(5) For any subset $Y \subseteq \mathbb{A}^n$,
$$
Z(I(Y)) = \overline{Y},
$$
the closure of $Y$.

*Proof.* (1), (2), and (3) are obvious. (4) is basically Hilbert's Nullstellensatz. 

To prove (5), note that $Y \subseteq Z(I(Y))$, which is closed, so $\overline{Y} \subseteq Z(I(Y))$. On the other hand, let $W$ be any closed set containing $Y$. Then $W = Z(\mathfrak{a})$ for some ideal $\mathfrak{a}$. So $Z(\mathfrak{a}) \supseteq Y$, and by (2), $I(Z(\mathfrak{a})) \subseteq I(Y)$. But certainly $\mathfrak{a} \subseteq IZ(\mathfrak{a})$, so by (1) we have $W = Z(\mathfrak{a}) \supseteq Z(I(Y))$. Thus $Z(I(Y)) = \overline{Y}$

**Corollary 1.4.** There is a one-to-one inclusion-reversing correspondence between algebraic sets in $\mathbb{A}^n$ and radical ideals (ideals equal to their own radical, I uhh don't know examples for this one) in $A$, given by $Y \rightarrow I(Y)$ and $\mathfrak{a} \rightarrow Z(\mathfrak{a})$. Furthermore, an algebraic set is irreducible iff its ideal is a prime ideal. 

*Proof.* First part is proven already above. To prove the last part: if $Y$ is irreducible, we show that $I(Y)$ is prime. Indeed, if $fg \in I(Y)$, then $Y \in Z(fg) = Z(f) \cup Z(g)$. Thus $Y = (Y \cap Z(f)) \cup (Y \cap Z(g))$, both being closed subsets of $Y$. Since $Y$ is irreducible, we have either $Y = Y \cap Z(f)$, in which case $Y \subseteq Z(f)$, or $Y \subseteq Z(g)$, so either $f$ or $g \in I(Y)$.

Conversely, let $\mathfrak{p}$ be a prime ideal, and suppose that $Z(\idl{p})$ = $Y_1 \cup Y_2$, then $\idl{p}$ = $I(Y_1) \cap I(Y_2)$, so either $\idl{p} \in I(Y_1)$ or $\idl{p} \in I(Y_2)$.  

**Example:** 
1. $\A^n$ is irreducible, since it corresponds to the $0$ ideal.
2. Let $f$ be an irreducible polynomial in $A = k[x, y]$. Then $f$ generates a prime ideal in $A$, since $A$ is a huh? unique factorization domain? So the zero set $Y = Z(f)$ is irreducible. We call it the *affine curve* defined by the equation $f(x, y) = 0$. If $f$ has degree $d$, then we say $Y$ is a curve of degree $d$.
3. More generally, if $f$ is an irreducible polynomial in $A = k[x_1, ..., x_n]$, $Y$ is called a surface if $n = 3$, hypersurface if $n > 3$.
4. A maximal ideal $\idl{m}$ of $A = k[x_1, ..., x_n]$ corresponds to a minimal irreducible closed subset of $\A^n$, which must be a point, say $P = (a_1, ..., a_n)$ (Something about inclusion-reversal? Will ask later)
5. If k is not algebraically closed, these results don't hold. 

**Definition:** If $Y \in \A^n$ is an affine algebraic set, we define the affine coordinate ring $A(Y) of Y$, to be $A/I(Y)$. 

**Remark:** If $Y$ is an affine variety, then $A(Y)$ is an integral domain. Furthermore, $A(Y)$ is a finitely generated $k$-algebra. Conversely, any finitely generated $k$-algebra $B$ which is a domain is the affine coordinate ring of some affine variety. Indeed, write $B$ as the quotient of a ring $A = k[x_1, ..., x_n]$ by an ideal $\idl{a}$, and let $Y = Z(\idl{a})$

***
Next, we study the topology of our varieties. To do so we introduce an important class of topological spaces which includes all varieties:

**Definition:** A topological space $X$ is called *noetherian* if it satisfies the *descending chain condition* for closed subsets: for any sequence $Y_1 \supseteq Y_2 \supseteq ...$ of closed subsets, there is an integer $r$ such that $Y_r = Y_{r+1} = ...$

**Proposition 1.5:** *In a noetherian topological space $X$, every nonempty closed subset $Y$ can be expressed as a finite union $Y = Y_1 \cup ... \cup Y_r$ of irreducible closed subsets $Y_i$. If we require that $Y_i \nsupseteq Y_j$ for $i \neq j$, then the $Y_i$ are uniquely determined. They are called the **irreducible components** of $Y$.* 

*Proof:* First we show that such a representation exists. Let $\idl{G}$ be the set of nonempty closed subsets of $X$ which cannot be written as a finite union of irreducible closed subset. If $\idl{G}$ is nonempty, then since $X$ is noetherian, it must contain a minimal element, say $Y$. Then $Y$ is not irreducible, by construction of $\idl{G}$, and we can write $Y = Y' \cup Y''$. By minimality of $Y$, $Y'$ and $Y''$ can be "reduced", hence so can $Y$, contradiction. 

Next we show uniqueness of such a representation. Assume $Y = Y_1 \cup ... \cup Y_r = Y_1' \cup ... \cup Y_s'$. Then $Y_1' \in Y = Y_1 \cup ... \cup Y_r \rightarrow Y_1' \in Y_i$ for some $i$, say 1. Similarly $Y_1 \in Y'_j$ for some $j$. So $Y_1' \in Y_j'$, and hence j = 1 and $Y_1 = Y'_1$. Now let $Z = (Y - Y_1)^-$, proceed by induction.

**Corollary 1.6.** *Every algebraic set in $\mathbb{A}^n$ can be expressed uniquely as a union of varieties, no one containing another.*

**Definition.** If $X$ is a topological space, we define the *dimension* of $X$ ($\dim X$) to be the supremum of all integers $n$ such that there exists a chain $Z_0 \in Z_1 \in ... \in Z_n$ of distinct irreducible closed subsets of $X$. We define the dimension of an affine or quasi-affine variety to be the dimension of its topological space. (Does this mean we're considering the subspace topology?)

**Definition.** In a ring $\textit{A}$, the *height* of a prime ideal $\idl{p}$ is the supremum of all integers $n$ such that there exists a chain
$$
\mathfrak{p}_0 \subset \mathfrak{p}_1 \subset \cdots \subset \mathfrak{p}_n = \mathfrak{p}
$$
of distinct prime ideals. We define the \textit{dimension} (or \textit{Krull dimension}) of $A$ to be the supremum of the heights of all prime ideals.

**Proposition 1.7.** *If $Y$ is an affine algebraic set, then the dimension of $Y$ is equal to the dimension of its affine coordinate ring $A(Y)$.*

*Proof.* If $Y$ is an affine algebraic set in $\mathbb{A}^n$, then the closed irreducible subsets of $Y$ correspond to prime ideals of $A = k[x_1,\dots,x_n]$ (why) containing $I(Y)$. These in turn correspond to prime ideals of $A(Y)$ (why). Hence $\dim Y$ is the length of the longest chain of prime ideals in $A(Y)$, which is its dimension.

This proposition allows us to apply results from the dimension theory of noetherian rings to algebraic geometry.

**Theorem 1.8A.** *Let $k$ be a field, and let $B$ be an integral domain which is a finitely generated $k$-algebra. Then:*

(1) *the dimension of $B$ is equal to the transcendence degree (what?) of the quotient field $K(B)$ of $B$ over $k$;*

(2) *for any prime ideal $\mathfrak{p}$ in $B$, we have*
$$
\operatorname{height}\,\mathfrak{p} + \dim B/\mathfrak{p} = \dim B.
$$

**Proposition 1.9.** The dimension of $\A^n$ is $n$.

*Proof.* According to 1.7.

**Proposition 1.10.** *If $Y$ is a quasi-affine variety, then $\dim Y = \dim \overline{Y}$.*

*Proof.* If $Z_0 \subset Z_1 \subset \cdots \subset Z_n$ is a sequence of distinct closed irreducible subsets of $Y$, then $\overline{Z_0} \subset \overline{Z_1} \subset \cdots \subset \overline{Z_n}$ is a sequence of distinct closed irreducible subsets of $\overline{Y}$ (1.1.4), so we have $\dim Y \leq \dim \overline{Y}$. In particular, $\dim Y$ is finite, so we can choose a maximal such chain $Z_0 \subset \cdots \subset Z_n$, with $n = \dim Y$. In that case $Z_0$ must be a point $P$, and the chain $P = \overline{Z_0} \subset \cdots \subset \overline{Z_n}$ will also be maximal (1.1.3). Now $P$ corresponds to a maximal ideal $\mathfrak{m}$ of the affine coordinate ring $A(\overline{Y})$ of $\overline{Y}$. The $\overline{Z_i}$ correspond to prime ideals contained in $\mathfrak{m}$, so $\operatorname{height}\,\mathfrak{m} = n$. On the other hand, since $P$ is a point in affine space, $A(\overline{Y})/\mathfrak{m} \cong k$ (1.4.4). Hence by (1.8A(b)) we find that $n = \dim A(\overline{Y}) = \dim \overline{Y}$. Thus $\dim Y = \dim \overline{Y}$.

**Theorem 1.11A (Krull's Hauptidealsatz).** *Let $A$ be a noetherian ring, and let $f \in A$ be an element which is neither a zero divisor nor a unit. Then every minimal prime ideal $\mathfrak{p}$ containing $f$ has height $1$.*

*Proof.* Atiyah–Macdonald [1, p. 122].

**Proposition 1.12A.** *A noetherian integral domain $A$ is a unique factorization domain if and only if every prime ideal of height $1$ is principal.*

*Proof.* Matsumura [2, p. 141], or Bourbaki [1, Ch. 7, §3].

**Proposition 1.13.** *A variety $Y$ in $\mathbb{A}^n$ has dimension $n - 1$ if and only if it is the zero set $Z(f)$ of a single nonconstant irreducible polynomial in $A = k[x_1,\dots,x_n]$.*

*Proof.* If $f$ is an irreducible polynomial, we have already seen that $Z(f)$ is a variety. Its ideal is the prime ideal $\mathfrak{p} = (f)$. By (1.11A), $\mathfrak{p}$ has height $1$, so by (1.8A), $Z(f)$ has dimension $n - 1$. Conversely, a variety of dimension $n - 1$ corresponds to a prime ideal of height $1$. Now the polynomial ring $A$ is a unique factorization domain, so by (1.12A), $\mathfrak{p}$ is principal, necessarily generated by an irreducible polynomial $f$. Hence $Y = Z(f)$.

**Remark 1.13.1.** A prime ideal of height $2$ in a polynomial ring cannot necessarily be generated by two elements (Ex. 1.11).
***
"Education is that which remains, if one has forgotten everything he learned in school." I think this is a saying that is believed to be Einstein, I personally think it's from Herriot, but it doesn't really matter. Today I kinda want to examine that idea again. 

If you are familiar with mathematics at an undergraduate level, you probably have learnt about vector spaces - any set over a field that satisfies "vector addition" and "scalar multiplication". Well what specifically is "vector addition" and scalar multiplication"? Maybe you still remember that this means the elements have to satisfy, what, eight axioms regarding something about commutativity and associativity and linearity. If you ask me right now, I will not be able to tell you what those eight axioms are, but if you tell me that you have a vector space, then I can immediately imagine what that you have looks like, how elements can interact, what makes it different from modules, etc..

And I just think that that's what the saying means: when every formality and axioms and theorems and words and symbols and images have been stripped completely away from your mind, then whatever is left of your understanding is your education. Understanding using words is only understanding at a surface level; you have to truly engrave the essence part of these concepts, the part that has nothing to do with words, into your comprehension. Which leads me to why I'm going to try to read algebraic geometry while having a less than ideal background on commutative algebra (haha get it "ideal"). I believe I can consume a little bit of the "essence", the "soul", which lies in varieties and schemes, of algebraic geometry through this. 

Anyway the actual context where Einstein says it is this:

> "... If you have followed my meditations up to this point, you will probably wonder about one thing. I have spoken fully about what spirit, according to my opinion, youth should have instructed. But I have said nothing yet about the choice of subjects for instruction, nor about the method of teaching. Should language predominate or the technical education in science?
>
> To this I answer: in my opinion all this is of secondary importance. If a young man has trained his muscles and physical endurance by gymnastics and walking, he will later be fitted for every physical work. This is also analogous to the training of the mind and of the mental and manual skill. Thus, the wit was not wrong who defined education in this way: "Education is that which remains, if one has forgotten everything he learned in school."
>
> For this reason I am not at all anxious to take sides in the struggle between the followers of the classical philologic-historical education and the education more devoted to natural science..."
> On Education: Einstein, 1931 -- an address at the State University of New York http://www.cse.iitm.ac.in/~kalyantv/pdf/on_edu.pdf

So what I said is prrrrobably not what he meant, but I don't care. 



